LTS (Gateway & Dashboard) 5.8.9 RNs.mdx (#1019)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: developer-support/release-notes/dashboard.mdx

## 5.8 Release Notes

### 5.8.9 Release Notes

> #### Release Date 10 December 2025

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Release Date 11 December 2025
```

| :------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------- | :---------------------- | :-------- | 
| [Go](https://go.dev/dl/)                                     | 1.24  |  1.24  | [Go plugins](/api-management/plugins/golang) must be built using Go 1.24 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | | 
| [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)  | 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | | 
| [DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb/)  | 4, 5  | 4, 5  | | 
| [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)         | 13.x - 17.x        | 13.x - 17.x            | | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)| v3.0.x                 | v3.0.x                 | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas) |

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

> In this release we've deprecated `allow_explicit_policy_id`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this release we've deprecated the [allow_explicit_policy_id](/tyk-dashboard/configuration#allow-explicit-policy-id) configuration option. This was previously added to allow the use of custom policy IDs, which is now the default behaviour so this option is redundant.
```

We have simplified the Tyk Gateway to use the Policy ID exclusively, instead of the Policy Database ID, improving consistency across the platform. This means that the `allow_explicit_policy_id` Gateway configuration is now redundant and marked deprecated, as the Policy ID field is always used.

If a policy definition is loaded onto the Tyk Dashboard that does not have a Policy ID set, Tyk will automatically set the `id` field to the value in `_id`. There are no changes to the Gateway or Dashboard APIs from this enhancement, ensuring backward compatibility.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Quick Start API Testing Issues'>
Resolved multiple issues preventing successful API testing in the Quick Start onboarding flow. Users can now test APIs with any response type (JSON, HTML, XML) without encountering HTTP 500 errors or blank response displays.
Additionally, fixed URL handling issues that occurred when gateway endpoints were configured without URL schemas, ensuring the "Test your API" step works reliably regardless of configuration format. 
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fix Certificate Search to Query Full Certificate Store in API Designer'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Fixed an issue in the Tyk OAS API Designer when selecting a TLS certificate to attach to the API (for example, a client certificate for client-gateway mTLS). To improve performance when scrolling through the list of existing certificates, the UI uses pagination to load a subset of certificates at a time. The certificate ID search would only match against the currently loaded page of certificates, so a certificate might not appear to exist when it does, but just hasn't been loaded yet. Now the search functionality has been improved to look through the full list of certificates in the Tyk Certificate Store, rather than relying on the paginated data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> </Accordion>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

<Accordion title='Dashboard UI Fixes'>
- **Incorrect Data Range Display in Total API Traffic Dashboard Chart**: Fixed an issue where the **Total API Traffic** chart on the **Nodes & Licenses** screen displays data from the wrong time period.
- **TIB User Role Mappings Disappeared on Update**: Fixed a bug that caused TIB profiles to vanish on updates made to `Provider Configuration` advanced settings.
- **Access Tab Selection from Filtered Dropdown**: Fixed an issue where users and categories could not be selected from filtered dropdown lists in the Access tab of the Tyk OAS API designer.

> - **Fixed API Filter Preservation and Data Graph Onboarding Display Issues**: Resolved filtering issues where applying multiple filters (name + category) would drop previously applied filters instead of combining them. Users can now apply multiple filters that work together as expected, with all active filters preserved during pagination and sorting. Also fixed the Data Graph onboarding wizard incorrectly appearing when filters returned zero results - it now only shows when no APIs actually exist in the system, keeping filters visible and clearable when results are empty.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Unable to Apply Multiple Filters to API List**: Resolved filtering issues where applying multiple filters (name + category) would drop previously applied filters instead of combining them. Users can now apply multiple filters that work together as expected, with all active filters preserved during pagination and sorting.
- **Data Graph Wizard Incorrectly Displayed**: Fixed an issue where the Data Graph onboarding wizard incorrectly appeared when filters returned zero results - it now only shows when no APIs actually exist in the system, keeping filters visible when results are empty.
```

> </Accordion>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Incomplete Certificate Search in API Designer**: Fixed an issue when selecting a TLS certificate to attach to a Tyk OAS API (for example, a client certificate for client-gateway mTLS). To improve performance when scrolling through the list of existing certificates, the UI uses pagination to load a subset of certificates at a time. The certificate ID search would only match against the currently loaded page of certificates, so a certificate might not appear to exist when it does, but just hasn't been loaded yet. Now the search functionality has been improved to look through the full list of certificates in the Tyk Certificate Store, rather than relying on the paginated data.
</Accordion>
```

## 5.8 Release Notes

### 5.8.9 Release Notes

#### Release Date 10 December 2025

#### Release Highlights

> This patch release contains various bug fixes and introduces enhanced Open Policy Agent support for API type detection. For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.8.9).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This patch release contains various bug fixes and introduces new OPA helper functions to identify the type of API being processed (Tyk OAS, Tyk Streams, Tyk Classic). For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.8.9).
```

#### Breaking Changes

There are no breaking changes in this release.

#### Dependencies

##### Compatibility Matrix For Tyk Components

| Dashboard Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |

> | 5.8.9 | MDCB v2.8.6    | MDCB v2.8.6 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 5.8.9 | MDCB v2.8.7    | MDCB v2.8.7 |
```

This should be v2.8.7, per the Tyk Charts defaults

| :------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------- | :---------------------- | :-------- | 
| [Go](https://go.dev/dl/)                                     | 1.24  |  1.24  | [Go plugins](/api-management/plugins/golang) must be built using Go 1.24 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | | 
| [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)  | 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | | 
| [DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb/)  | 4, 5  | 4, 5  | | 
| [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)         | 13.x - 17.x        | 13.x - 17.x            | | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)| v3.0.x                 | v3.0.x                 | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas) |

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

> There are no deprecations in this release.

Reviewer 2: `allow_explicit_policy_id` is deprecated (per change log)

#### Upgrade instructions

If you are upgrading to 5.8.9, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk). 

#### Downloads

- [Docker Image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-dashboard/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.8.9)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-dashboard:v5.8.9
    ``` 
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts v5.0.0](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart#500-release-notes)

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.8.9"></a>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

> <Accordion title='Open Policy Agent Support for Distinguishing Tyk OAS APIs'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Open Policy Agent Functions to Identify API Style'>
```

> Added three new OPA helper functions (`isTykOas`, `isTykClassic`, and `isTykStreams`) that can be used in OPA rules to distinguish between different API types, ensuring that logic is only applied to the appropriate API types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Added three new OPA helper functions (`isTykOas`, `isTykClassic`, and `isTykStreams`) that can be used in OPA rules to distinguish between different API types, ensuring that only appropriate logic is applied.
```

</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

##### Fixed

<AccordionGroup>

> <Accordion title='Fixed Dashboard Memory Exhaustion When `use_redis_log` Is Enabled'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Dashboard Memory Exhaustion When `use_redis_log` Is Enabled in Gateway'>
```

Fixed an issue where enabling `use_redis_log` on a Tyk Gateway could cause the Dashboard to exhaust memory due to unbounded log accumulation from the UI notification endpoint.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed API Filter Preservation and Data Graph Onboarding Display Issues'>

Reviewer 2: Can you please add these into the collated UI improvements section lower down?

We have simplified the Tyk Gateway to use the Policy ID exclusively, instead of the Policy Database ID, improving consistency across the platform. This means that the `allow_explicit_policy_id` Gateway configuration is now redundant and marked deprecated, as the Policy ID field is always used.

If a policy definition is loaded onto the Tyk Dashboard that does not have a Policy ID set, Tyk will automatically set the `id` field to the value in `_id`. There are no changes to the Gateway or Dashboard APIs from this enhancement, ensuring backward compatibility.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Quick Start API Testing Issues'>
Resolved multiple issues preventing successful API testing in the Quick Start onboarding flow. Users can now test APIs with any response type (JSON, HTML, XML) without encountering HTTP 500 errors or blank response displays.
Additionally, fixed URL handling issues that occurred when gateway endpoints were configured without URL schemas, ensuring the "Test your API" step works reliably regardless of configuration format. 
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fix Certificate Search to Query Full Certificate Store in OAS API Designer'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fix Certificate Search to Query Full Certificate Store in API Designer'>
```

Fixed an issue in the Tyk OAS API Designer when selecting a TLS certificate to attach to the API (for example, a client certificate for client-gateway mTLS). To improve performance when scrolling through the list of existing certificates, the UI uses pagination to load a subset of certificates at a time. The certificate ID search would only match against the currently loaded page of certificates, so a certificate might not appear to exist when it does, but just hasn't been loaded yet. Now the search functionality has been improved to look through the full list of certificates in the Tyk Certificate Store, rather than relying on the paginated data.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Dashboard UI Fixes'>

> - **Fixed Incorrect Data Range Display in Total API Traffic Dashboard Chart**: Fixed an issue where the **Total API Traffic** chart on the **Nodes & Licenses** screen displays data from the wrong time period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Incorrect Data Range Display in Total API Traffic Dashboard Chart**: Fixed an issue where the **Total API Traffic** chart on the **Nodes & Licenses** screen displays data from the wrong time period.
```

> - **Resolved Issue Where TIB User Role Mappings Disappeared on Update**: Fixed a bug that caused TIB profiles to vanish on updates made to `Provider Configuration` advanced settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **TIB User Role Mappings Disappeared on Update**: Fixed a bug that caused TIB profiles to vanish on updates made to `Provider Configuration` advanced settings.
```

> - **Fix API Ownership User Selection from Filtered Dropdown in OAS APIs**: Fixed an issue where users and categories could not be selected from filtered dropdown lists in the API ownership section of OAS APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Access Tab Selection from Filtered Dropdown**: Fixed an issue where users and categories could not be selected from filtered dropdown lists in the Access tab of the Tyk OAS API designer.
```

## 5.8 Release Notes

### 5.8.9 Release Notes

#### Release xx December 2025

#### Release Highlights

For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.8.9).

#### Breaking Changes

There are no breaking changes in this release.

#### Dependencies

##### Compatibility Matrix For Tyk Components

| Dashboard Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 5.8.9 | MDCB v2.8.7    | MDCB v2.8.7 |
|         | Operator v1.2.0  | Operator v0.17 |

> |         | Sync v2.1.4    | Sync v2.1.1 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|         | Sync v2.1.5    | Sync v2.1.1 |
```
I don't know about this one.

#### Deprecations

There are no deprecations in this release.

#### Upgrade instructions

If you are upgrading to 5.8.9, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk). 

#### Downloads

- [Docker Image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-dashboard/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.8.9)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-dashboard:v5.8.9
    ``` 
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts v4.2.0](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart#420-release-notes)

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.8.9"></a>

##### Changed

<AccordionGroup>
<Accordion title='Storage library v1.3.0 Update Across All Tyk Components'>
Updated the storage library to v1.3.0 to include MongoDB connection fixes and foundational SQL support. All components now benefit from improved connection management and enhanced storage layer reliability.
</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='Open Policy Agent Support for Distinguishing Tyk OAS APIs'>

> Added three new OPA helper functions (`isTykOas`, `isTykClassic`, and `isTykStreams`) that can be used in OPA rules to distinguish between different API types, ensuring that logic is only applied to the appropriate API types.

Reviewer: Is this something that can be documented? In the OPA rules file? https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk-docs/blob/main/snippets/opa-rules.mdx
